Clarify the description of REST vs OCS in accordance to sugestions discussed (#12264)
nextcloud/documentation: developer_manual/digging_deeper/rest_apis.rst

.. sectionauthor:: Bernhard Posselt <dev@bernhard-posselt.com>

Offering a RESTful API is not different from creating a :doc:`route <../basics/routing>` and :doc:`controllers <../basics/controllers>` for the web interface.

> It is recommended though to inherit from ApiController and add **@CORS** annotations to the methods so that `web applications will also be able to access the API <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Access_control_CORS>`_.

Reviewer: No relevant diff?

Author: This is just styling to put every sentence on it's own line. I can drop that as well.

    )

Keep in mind that multiple apps will likely depend on the API interface once it is published and they will move at different speeds to react to changes implemented in the API.

> Therefore it is recommended to version the API in the URL to not break existing apps when backwards incompatible changes are introduced::

Reviewer: Same here

        }

    }

.. _ocs-vs-rest:

Relation of REST and OCS
------------------------

There is a close relationship between REST APIs and :ref:`OCS <ocscontroller>`.
Both provide a way to transmit data between the backend of the app in the Nextcloud server and some frontend.

The following combinations of attributes might be useful for various scenarios:

> #. Plain frontend route: No special attribute related to CSRF or CORS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Plain frontend route: ``Controller`` class
```

> #. Plain Frontend with CRSF checks disabled: Add the ``#[NoCSRFRequired]`` attribute

Reviewer: CSRF checks should only be disabled when absolutely necessary, this line should have a big warning

Author: These are some of *the few words* I wanted to add...

> #. Plain Frontend with CRSF checks disabled: Add the ``#[NoCSRFRequired]`` attribute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Plain Frontend with CRSF checks disabled: ``Controller`` class and ``#[NoCSRFRequired]`` attribute on the method
```

> #. REST route with CORS enabled: Add the ``#[CORS]`` attribute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. REST route with CORS enabled: ``Controller`` class and ``#[CORS]`` attribute on the route
```

> #. OCS-based route

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. OCS-based route: ``OCSController`` class
```

> #. OCS-based route

Reviewer: There is another case with OCS+CSRF

Author: As we restricted to the _useful_ combinations, I think this case is not relavant anymore, am I correct?

There are different ways a clients might interact with your APIs.
These ways depend on your API configuration (what you allow) and on which route the request is finally made.

- *Access from web frontend* means the user is browses the Nextcloud web frontend with a browser.
- *Access from an external app* indicates that the user is not using the normal browser (as logged in) but directly navigates a certain URL.

>   This can be in a browser tab or an external program (like an Android app or simply a curl command line).

Reviewer: These two cases are different, as the CSRF checks want to prevent the former while the later should usually be allowed.

Author: What is former and latter here for you? Browser tab and curl?

Reviewer: Yes

- *Access from external website* means that the user browses some third party web site and *magically* data from your app appears.

>   Technically, the other website would embed/load/use images, JSON data, or other resources from a URL pointing to the Nextcloud server.

Reviewer: This use-case is relatively niche and I think the general advice is to avoid it (and CORS altogether) as it opens unintended security issues if you are not careful. I think this should have some warnings as well.

Author: I will add some words here as well

Author: Is this sufficient for you now? Otherwise we discuss in Berlin

.. list-table:: Comparision of different API types
    :header-rows: 1
    :align: center

    * - Description
      - 1 (plain)
      - 2 (no CSRF)
      - 3 (CORS)
      - 4 (OCS)
    * - URL prefix (relative to server)
      - ``/apps/<appid>/``
      - ``/apps/<appid>/``
      - ``/apps/<appid>/``
      - ``/ocs/v2.php/apps/<appid>/``
    * - Access from web frontend
      - yes
      - yes (CSRF risk)

>       - yes (CSRF risk)

Reviewer: Maybe explain that for CORS one needs to disable CSRF and thus automatically poses a security risk through CSRF attacks

Author: Yes, good point.

Author: I think this is solved as part of the warning attached to this section. Feel free to comment and reopen this comment.

      - yes
    * - Access from external app
      - --- (CSRF protection blocks)
      - yes
      - yes

>       - yes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - no
```
OCS is still protected against CSRF attacks using the OCS-APIRequest header or a CSRF token.

Author: Isn't [this line](https://github.com/nextcloud/server/blob/94c529409813e03d632662283a5cd302ef8e9781/lib/private/AppFramework/Middleware/Security/SecurityMiddleware.php#L204) disabling the csrf checks for OCS when done with a bearer token?

Reviewer: Not really, it also checks that the custom header is set (https://github.com/nextcloud/server/blob/94c529409813e03d632662283a5cd302ef8e9781/lib/private/AppFramework/Middleware/Security/SecurityMiddleware.php#L235) which is a CSRF check.

Author: I think, we are arguing from different viewing angles here. Yes, the custom header is some way to enforce CSRF protection. Either a token _or_ the custom header is a way to prevent access to the endpoint.

However, when thinking of external (native) apps, this would allow to access the endpoint just by sending the header without knowing the actual token. 

PS: Having reread the last comment, I see the point in splitting _direct access in browser_ (which you would not do on OCS directly) from the _native app_ approach.

    * - Access from external web page
      - ---
      - ---
      - yes

>       - yes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - no
```
Not true for OCS, unless CORS is enabled

    * - Transmitted data type

>       - plain data
>       - plain data
>       - plain data
>       - encapsulated data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - plain data
      - plain data
      - plain data
      - encapsulated data (JSON or XML)
```

"plain data" is not very descriptive. In fact any response can be used for any of these methods, just OCS handles the DataResponses differently

Author: I should be a bit more verbose on this, I see

> As a rule of thumb one can conclude that OCS provides a good way to handle most use cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a rule of thumb one can conclude that OCS provides a good way to handle most use cases including sufficient security checks.
```

The only exception to this is if you want to provide an API for external usage where you have to comply with an externally defined API scheme.

> Here, the encapsulation introduced in OCS might be in your way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here, the encapsulation introduced in OCS and CSRF checks might be in your way.
```

        }

    }

.. _ocs-vs-rest:

Relation of REST and OCS
------------------------

There is a close relationship between REST APIs and :ref:`OCS <ocscontroller>`.
Both provide a way to transmit data between the backend of the app in the Nextcloud server and some frontend.

The following combinations of attributes might be relevant for various scenarios:

#. Plain frontend route: ``Controller`` class
#. Plain Frontend with CRSF checks disabled: ``Controller`` class and ``#[NoCSRFRequired]`` attribute on the method
#. OCS-based route: ``OCSController`` class

> #. OCS-based route with CSRF disabled: ``OCSController`` class and ``#[NoCSRFRequired]`` attribute on the method

Reviewer: I think this case doesn't exist, NoCSRFRequired should not have an effect on OCSController, but I will have to check that in the code to be sure.

Author: I was thinking back and forth on this as well. In the end, I decided to keep the case as there is a certain difference (at least from the implementation):

For methods with `NoCSRFRequired`, [this section](https://github.com/nextcloud/server/blob/5bd1873511c214330822b6579a1f5374ed7a5dfe/lib/private/AppFramework/Middleware/Security/SecurityMiddleware.php#L186-L207) is doing nothing.

For the case where the attribute is not given, the strict cookie check boils down to a check on [the `OCS-APIREQUEST` header](https://github.com/nextcloud/server/blob/5bd1873511c214330822b6579a1f5374ed7a5dfe/lib/private/AppFramework/Http/Request.php#L454-L457) or no valid session token.

With the header in place (as the OCS controller generally expects), the second part is also skipped: The CSRF check is [hardcoded to true](https://github.com/nextcloud/server/blob/5bd1873511c214330822b6579a1f5374ed7a5dfe/lib/private/AppFramework/Http/Request.php#L430-L432), thus [`isInvalidCSRFRequired`](https://github.com/nextcloud/server/blob/5bd1873511c214330822b6579a1f5374ed7a5dfe/lib/private/AppFramework/Middleware/Security/SecurityMiddleware.php#L226C19-L226C40) returns false.

When the header is not set, you enter the[ second if block](https://github.com/nextcloud/server/blob/5bd1873511c214330822b6579a1f5374ed7a5dfe/lib/private/AppFramework/Middleware/Security/SecurityMiddleware.php#L195-L207) and will check the inner if. The check `isinstance OCSController` is obviously true. The [`isValidOCSRequest`](https://github.com/nextcloud/server/blob/5bd1873511c214330822b6579a1f5374ed7a5dfe/lib/private/AppFramework/Middleware/Security/SecurityMiddleware.php#L234-L237) is somewhat redundant as it can only be reached with the header unset.  Alternatively, a bearer authorization header is sufficient to make the CSRF checker happy (even without OCS header and without `NoCSRFRequired` attribute).

I was adding this case as a reaction on your statement

> There is another case with OCS+CSRF

In my opinion the last case could be dropped (and was never planned in the first round) but I do not see clearly the motivation of it, to be honest. Did I misunderstand your statement above?

Reviewer: > In my opinion the last case could be dropped (and was never planned in the first round) but I do not see clearly the motivation of it, to be honest. Did I misunderstand your statement above?

I messed up, I meant OCS+CORS...
Currently the CORS cases are completely missing in the list.

Author: Yeah, okay, then that makes more sense. I can read the cors posts and extend by the OCS+cors as well.

I will add a warning about cors in general similar to csrf of you do not mind.

Author: If you have any idea how to describe the case *Access from external website* more precisely or otherwise better, feel free to comment :wink:.

        }

    }

.. _ocs-vs-rest:

Relation of REST and OCS
------------------------

There is a close relationship between REST APIs and :ref:`OCS <ocscontroller>`.
Both provide a way to transmit data between the backend of the app in the Nextcloud server and some frontend.

The following combinations of attributes might be relevant for various scenarios:

#. Plain frontend route: ``Controller`` class
#. Plain frontend with CRSF checks disabled: ``Controller`` class and ``#[NoCSRFRequired]`` attribute on the method

> #. REST route with CORS enabled: ``Controller`` class and ``#[CORS]`` and ``#[NoCSRFRequired]`` attributes on the route

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Plain frontend route with CORS enabled: ``Controller`` class and ``#[CORS]`` and ``#[NoCSRFRequired]`` attributes on the route
```
I wouldn't make a differentiation between these

> #. OCS-based route: ``OCSController`` class
> #. OCS-based route with CORS enabled: ``OCSController`` class and ``#[CORS]`` attribute on the method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. OCS route: ``OCSController`` class
#. OCS route with CORS enabled: ``OCSController`` class and ``#[CORS]`` attribute on the method
```

.. warning::
  Adding the ``#[NoCRSFRequired]`` attribute imposes a security risk.
  You should not add this to your controller methods unless you understand the implications and be sure that you absolutely need the attribute.

.. warning::
  Adding the attribute ``#[CORS]`` alone is not sufficient to allow access using CORS.
  The CSRF checker will typically fail, so enabling CORS enforces you to disable the CSRF checker as well.
  Although the disabled CSRF checker in itself is a security issue to consider, adding CORS opens up this even more.
  You should make sure, that you understand the implications completely when enabling CORS and do so only when there is a good use case.

There are different ways a clients might interact with your APIs.
These ways depend on your API configuration (what you allow) and on which route the request is finally made.

- *Access from web frontend* means the user is browses the Nextcloud web frontend with a browser.
- *Access from an external app* indicates that the user is not using the normal browser (as logged in) but directly navigates a certain URL.

>   This can be in a new browser tab or an external program (like an Android app or simply a curl command line).

Reviewer: I don't understand what these two cases have in common.
Security wise they are also a bit different, since you need CSRF protection to prevent redirect attacks via GET while this is completely irrelevant for non-browser use cases like curl.

Author: They have in common that the CSRF token is not (guaranteed to be) known as part of the Cookie header and that the user is doing a dedicated action to navigate there (not by using a JS/AJAX request).
You are right these might be considered as separate cases. From user perspective (what can be done? not what is secure?), both navigate to an arbitrary URL and fetch the data. Examples:

- The user navigates to http://cloud.example.com/apps/cookbook/recipe/1234 the basic HTML template should be rendered in the browser and load the recipe 1234. If the actual call to the HTML template would be CSRF-protected any bookmarked link would break.
- An app wants to fetch data from the cookbook using a REST-based API http://cloud.example.com/apps/cookbook/api/v1/recipes/1234. Here, the CSRF checks might cause trouble as well prohibiting legitimate access to the endpoint.

I have not worked out the security side of this. What do you mean by redirect attacks via GET?

> - *Access from external website* means that the user browses some third party web site and *magically* data from your app appears.
>   Technically, the other website would embed/load/use images, JSON data, or other resources from a URL pointing to the Nextcloud server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *Access from external website* means that the user browses some third party web site and data from your Nextcloud server appears.
  The other website has to embed/load/use images, JSON data, or other resources from a URL pointing to the Nextcloud server, to be able to do this.
```

      - yes
    * - Access from external website
      - ---
      - ---
      - yes
      - ---
      - yes
    * - Encapsulated data
      - no
      - no
      - no
      - yes (JSON or XML)
      - yes (JSON or XML)

Methods from ``Controller`` classes can return ``DataResponse`` objects similar to ``OCSController`` class methods.
For methods of a ``Controller`` class, the data of this response is sent e.g. as JSON as you provide it.
Basically, the output is very similar to what ``json_encode`` would do.
In contrast, the OCS controller will encapsulate the data in an outer shell that provides some more (meta) information.
For example a status code (similar to the HTTP status code) is transmitted at top level.
The actual data is transmitted in the ``data`` property.

As a rule of thumb one can conclude that OCS provides a good way to handle most use cases including sufficient security checks.
The only exception to this is if you want to provide an API for external usage where you have to comply with an externally defined API scheme.
Here, the encapsulation introduced in OCS and CSRF checks might be in your way.

.. [#] Only if you have set ``#[NoCSRFRequired]``.

>        OCS controllers have other CSRF checks in place that might with CORS without disabling the CSRF checks completely. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       OCS controllers have other CSRF checks in place that work with CORS without disabling the CSRF checks completely. 
```

>        Using the ``OCS-APIREQUEST`` header is also a CSRF protection but is compatible with CORS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       Using the ``OCS-APIRequest`` header is a CSRF protection which is compatible with CORS.
```

> .. [#] The OCS controller needs the request header ``OCS-APIREQUEST`` to be set to ``true``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. [#] The OCS controller needs the request header ``OCS-APIRequest`` to be set to ``true``.
```
